# 5. Install a zk cluster

## Prerequisites
Before you begin this installation and configuration guide, you’ll need the following:

- The standalone installation needs one server with a minimum of 4GB of RAM, including a non-root user 
  with sudo privileges and a firewall. You need two additional servers, set up by following the same 
  steps, for the multi-node cluster.
- OpenJDK 8 installed on your server, as ZooKeeper requires Java to run. To do this.
- Because ZooKeeper keeps data in memory to achieve high throughput and low latency, production systems work best 
  with 8GB of RAM. Lower amounts of RAM may lead to JVM swapping, which could cause ZooKeeper server latency. 
  High ZooKeeper server latency could result in issues like client session timeouts that would have an adverse impact 
  on system functionality.
  
Suppose we install the zookeeper on a cluster:
192.168.1.2 dl01.pengfei.org
192.168.1.3 dl02.pengfei.org
192.168.1.4 dl03.pengfei.org

## 5.1 Creating a User for ZooKeeper

```shell
# create a user for zookeeper with a home directory (-m)
sudo useradd zk -m

# Set bash as the default shell for the zk user:
sudo usermod --shell /bin/bash zk

# set a password for this user:
sudo passwd zk

# add user to the wheel(centos default sudo group) group(if you use other distribution, you need to change to the default sudoer group name), so it can run commands in a privileged mode:
usermod -aG sudo zk

# if you don't want zk has ssh access, go to /etc/ssh/sshd_config, and add following line
DenyUsers zk

# switch to the zk user. The -l flag invokes a login shell after switching users. A login shell resets environment variables and provides a clean start for the user.
su -l zk
```

## 5.2 Creating a Data Directory for ZooKeeper
ZooKeeper persists all configuration and state data to disk, so it can survive a reboot. In this step, you will create 
a data directory that ZooKeeper will use to read and write data. You can create the data directory on the local 
filesystem or on a remote storage drive. This tutorial will focus on creating the data directory on your local filesystem.

**Note the default data directory in the config is /tmp/zookeeper. Do not use the default, it will be removed every 30 days**

```shell
# create a directory 
sudo mkir -p /data/zookeeper

# grant zk the ownership to the directory
chown zk:zk /data/zookeeper
```

## 5.3 Download zookeeper
You can find the download page https://zookeeper.apache.org/releases.html#download
Here we choose the 3.6.3 the latest stable. even thought the newest version is 3.7.0

```shell
# goto parent dir
cd /opt/module

# download the latest stable
wget https://miroir.univ-lorraine.fr/apache/zookeeper/zookeeper-3.6.3/apache-zookeeper-3.6.3-bin.tar.gz

# extract the tar ball
tar -xzvf apache-zookeeper-3.6.3-bin.tar.gz

# change the ownership
sudo chown zk:zk -R  zookeeper-3.6.3

# Create a symbolic link using the ln command.
sudo ln -s zookeeper-3.6.3 zookeeper
sudo chown -h zk:zk zookeeper
```

## 5.4 Configuring a single node in standalone mode

The zk configuration files live in the ${parent_dir}/conf directory. This directory contains a sample configuration 
file **(zoo_sample.cfg)** that comes with the ZooKeeper distribution. This sample file contains the most common 
configuration parameter definitions and sample values for these parameters. Some common parameters are as follows:

- dataDir: is the directory used by Zookeeper to store data.
- tickTime: sets the length of a tick in milliseconds. A tick is a time unit used by ZooKeeper to measure the length between heartbeats. Minimum session timeouts are twice the tickTime.
- clientPort: The port used to listen for client connections.
- maxClientCnxns: limits the maximum number of client connections.

Create the zoo.cfg file or copy the sample cfg file, then add the following lines
```text
# A tickTime of 2000 milliseconds is the suggested interval between heartbeats. A shorter interval could lead to system 
# overhead with limited benefits.
tickTime=2000
dataDir=/data/zookeeper
# Conventionally, ZooKeeper uses port 2181 to listen for client connections.
clientPort=2181
# In most situations, 60 allowed client connections are plenty for development and testing.
maxClientCnxns=60
```

## 5.5 Multi node Zookeeper cluster Configuration
Nodes in the ZooKeeper cluster that work together as an application form a **quorum**. **Quorum** refers to the 
minimum number of nodes that need to agree on a transaction before it’s committed. A quorum needs an odd number of 
nodes so that it can establish a majority. An even number of nodes may result in a tie, which would mean the nodes 
would not reach a majority or consensus.

### 5.5.1 Edit zoo.cfg 
To make each node aware of its belonging cluster we need to modify the **zoo.cfg** file

```shell
vim /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper-3.4.10/conf/zoo.cfg

#put the following config

tickTime=2000
dataDir=/data/zookeeper
clientPort=2181
maxClientCnxns=60
initLimit=10
syncLimit=5
server.1=dl01.pengfei.org:2888:3888
server.2=dl02.pengfei.org:2888:3888
server.3=dl03.pengfei.org:2888:3888

```
- initLimit: It specifies the time that the initial synchronization phase can take. This is the time within which 
  each of the nodes in the quorum needs to connect to the leader. When you are processing large amounts of data just 
  increase this value as required.
- syncLimit: It specifies the time that can pass between sending a request and receiving an acknowledgment. It is 
  used to fix the allowable amount of time a server can be out of sync with the leader.
- The server.1, server.2 and server.3 specify the servers that form the Zookeeper cluster. Then you specify the 
  hostname of each of the servers followed by the port numbers 2888 and 3888. These ports are used for peer to peer 
  communication. The first (2888) port is used by followers to connect to the leader, and the second (3888) is for 
  leader election.
  
### 5.5.2

To make each node aware of the other nodes in the cluster, zk uses a **myid** file that is placed in the 
**data directory** of each node. **This myid file contains only a unique value between 1 and 255** which corresponds 
to the value specified in server.* of zoo.cfg file. 

For example,
- in server.1 the myid file only contains the value 1.
- in server.2 the myid file only contains the value 2.


In our example, the myid file should be under /data/zookeeper


## 5.6 Starting ZooKeeper and Testing the Standalone Installation
```shell

#start the zookeeper service daemon
sh /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper/bin/zkServer.sh start

#check the daemon status
sh /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper/bin/zkServer.sh status

#for a follower, the output is like this
ZooKeeper JMX enabled by default
Using config: /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper-3.4.10/bin/../conf/zoo.cfg
Mode: follower

#for a leader, the output is like this
ZooKeeper JMX enabled by default
Using config: /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper-3.4.10/bin/../conf/zoo.cfg
Mode: leader

#stop the daemon
sh /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper/bin/zkServer.sh stop

```
Now we are all set for the zookeeper service, in order to stop or start the zookeeper daemon, you need to execute the 
shell command on all nodes.

A CLI is available to connect to the server and issue commands. To start it use the command below

# this starts a zookeeper client connect to a zookeeper server
sh /opt/zookeeper/zookeeper/bin/zkCli.sh -server 127.0.0.1:2181

## 5.7 Cluster management

As we explained, to start, stop or check status, we need to login to each node and type the command. It's better if we
can manage the cluster from on terminal. Go check the **zk_cluster_management.sh** script, use it to manage your zk
cluster

## 5.8 More details about zk

For more information about the inner working of the zookeeper. Please go to my wiki page employes:pengfei.liu:data_science:zookeeper:start
  